---
title: Walkable City
date created: 2023-08-31T10:44:43-06:00
date modified: 2025-06-07T13:53:40-06:00
linter-yaml-title-alias: Walkable City
status: finished
---
# Walkable City

- Author: Jeff Speck #people/authors/jeff-speck
- Notebook:
- Review:

## Summary

## Key Ideas

## Further Lines of Inquiry

## Quotes

## Action Items

## Resources Mentioned

## Process Notes

### General Theory of Walkability.

- Page 11

A walk has to satisfy four main conditions. It must be:
1. Useful
	- most aspects of daily life are located close at hand and organized in a way that walking serves them well
2. Safe
	- The street has been designed to give pedestrians a fighting chance against being hit by automobiles; they must not only be safe but feel safe, which is even tougher to satisfy.
3. Comfortable
	- Buildings and landscape shape urban streets into "outdoor living rooms," in contrast to wide-open spaces, which usually fail to attract pedestrians
4. Interesting
	- Sidewalks are lined by unique buildings with friendly faces and that signs of humanity abound.

Each of these qualities is essential and none alone is sufficient

These four conditions are mostly a way of thinking about a series of specific rules that are further organized into what I call the [[#Ten Steps of Walkability]]. These will be explored later.

### City Designers Should Be Generalists

- Page 16

> I found this part espcially interesting, because it is another case that points toward the ideas mentioned in [[Range]] in regard to the benefits of Generalists

- The school and parks departments will push for fewer, larger facilities, since these are easier to maintain-and show off
- The public works department will insist that new neighborhoods be designed principally around snow and trash removal
- The department of transportation will build new roads to ease traffic generated by the very sprawl that they cause.

Each of these approaches may seem correct in a vacuum, but is wrong in a city.

If cities are to function properly, they must be planned by [[Range|Generalists]], as they once were. [[Range|Generalists]] understand that:
- consolidating parks means that fewer people can walk to them.
- infrastructure organized in service of big trucks is not always inviting to small people
- more lanes usually just lead to more traffic.

Most significantly, generalists-such as planners and, one hopes, mayors-ask the big-picture questions that are so often forgotten among the day-to-day shuffle of city governance. Questions like: What kind of city will help us thrive economically? What kind of city will keep our citizens not just safe, but healthy? What kind of city will be sustainable for generations to come?

### The Three Principal Arguments for Making Our Cities More Walkable

1. [[Wealth]]
2. Health
3. Sustainability

## Highlights

### A GENERAL THEORY OF WALKABILITY (Location 63)

The General Theory of Walkability explains how, to be favored, a walk has to satisfy four main conditions: it must be useful, safe, comfortable, and interesting. Each of these qualities is essential and none alone is sufficient. Useful means that most aspects of daily life are located close at hand and organized in a way that walking serves them well. Safe means that the street has been designed to give pedestrians a fighting chance against being hit by automobiles; they must not only be safe but feel safe, which is even tougher to satisfy. Comfortable means that buildings and landscape shape urban streets into “outdoor living rooms,” in contrast to wide-open spaces, which usually fail to attract pedestrians. Interesting means that sidewalks are lined by unique buildings with friendly faces and that signs of humanity abound. These four conditions are mostly a way of thinking about a series of specific rules that are further organized into what I call the Ten Steps of Walkability. These will be explored later. Together, I believe that they add up to a complete prescription for making our cities more walkable. But first, we must understand that the walkable city is not just a nice, idealistic notion. Rather, it is a simple, practical-minded solution to a host of complex problems that we face as a society, problems that daily undermine our nation’s economic competitiveness, public welfare, and environmental sustainability. (Location 118)

### PART I WHY WALKABILITY? (Location 131)

- The modern world is full of experts who are paid to ignore criteria beyond their professions. The school and parks departments will push for fewer, larger facilities, since these are easier to maintain—and show off. The public works department will insist that new neighborhoods be designed principally around snow and trash removal. The department of transportation will build new roads to ease traffic generated by the very sprawl that they cause. Each of these approaches may seem correct in a vacuum, but is wrong in a city. If they are to function properly, cities need to be planned by generalists, as they once were. Generalists understand that consolidating parks means that fewer people can walk to them. Generalists understand that infrastructure organized in service of big trucks is not always inviting to small people. And generalists, finally, are coming to understand that more lanes usually just lead to more traffic. Most significantly, generalists—such as planners and, one hopes, mayors—ask the big-picture questions that are so often forgotten among the day-to-day shuffle of city governance. Questions like: What kind of city will help us thrive economically? What kind of city will keep our citizens not just safe, but healthy? What kind of city will be sustainable for generations to come? These three issues—wealth, health, and sustainability—are, not coincidentally, the three principal arguments for making our cities more walkable. (Location 142)

#### WALKING, THE URBAN ADVANTAGE (Location 153)

- It turns out that this social scene could only be accessed by car and thus by invitation. With no pedestrian culture, there were no opportunities for the chance encounters that turn into friendships. (Location 164)
- The economic advantage that has already begun to accrue to walkable places can be attributed to three key factors. First, for certain segments of the population, chief among them young “creatives,” urban living is simply more appealing; many wouldn’t be caught dead anywhere else. Second, massive demographic shifts occurring right now mean that these pro-urban segments of the population are becoming dominant, creating a spike in demand that is expected to last for decades. Third, the choice to live the walkable life generates considerable savings for these households, and much of these savings are spent locally. (Location 175)
- In “The Great Car Reset,” Richard Florida observes: “Younger people today … no longer see the car as a necessary expense or a source of personal freedom. In fact, it is increasingly just the opposite: not owning a car and not owning a house are seen by more and more as a path to greater flexibility, choice, and personal autonomy.” (Location 194)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- With the leading edge of the boomers now approaching sixty-five years old, the group is finding that their suburban houses are too big. Their child-rearing days are ending, and all those empty rooms have to be heated, cooled, and cleaned, and the unused backyard maintained. Suburban houses can be socially isolating, especially as aging eyes and slower reflexes make driving everywhere less comfortable. Freedom for many in this generation means living in walkable, accessible communities with convenient transit linkages and good public services like libraries, cultural activities, and health care. (Location 221)

> Fort Collins shines in this respect

- quote David Byrne: “If we can build a successful city for children, we can build a successful city for all people.” (Location 243)
- Leinberger is optimistic about the larger impact of these population trends on cities. Writing in Grist, he concludes that “meeting the pent-up demand for walkable urban development will take a generation. (Location 251)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- This growing demand for pedestrian-friendly places is reflected in the runaway success of Walk Score, the website that calculates neighborhood walkability.● It was started on a lark in 2007 by Matt Lerner, Mike Mathieu, and Jesse Kocher, three partners in a software company (Location 275)

> Look into the Fort Collins Walk Score

- She comments that her buyers are increasingly aware of “how surprising and delightful your quality of life can be when you don’t have to get into a car to go every place in your life besides home.” (Location 290)
- More significantly, whatever they are used for, these savings are more likely to stay local than if spent on driving. Almost 85 percent of money expended on cars and gas leaves the local economy22—much of it, of course, bound for the pockets of Middle Eastern princes. (Location 334)

> 85%… Fuck! Thats frustrating. I should figure out how to reduce that!
> For example, Does an Electric car change that

- A significant amount of the money saved probably goes into housing, since that is a national tendency: families that spend less on transportation spend more on their homes,23 which is, of course, about as local as it gets. (Location 336)

> Less on car means more on housing. And other stuff. Thats a win!

- While transportation used to absorb only one-tenth of a typical family’s budget (1960), it now consumes more than one in five dollars spent.● All told, the average American family now spends about $14,000 per year driving multiple cars.24 By this measure, this family works from January 1 until April 13 just to pay for its cars. Remarkably, the typical “working” family, with an income of $20,000 to $50,000, pays more for transportation than for housing. (Location 340)

> Im an exception, but im curious how long i work to pay for our car and what percentage of my income is devoted to it.

- Catherine Lutz and Anne Lutz Fernandez note that “the cities with the largest drops in housing value (such as Las Vegas, down 37 percent) have been the most car-dependent, and the few cities with housing prices gains … have good transit alternatives.”29 (Location 356)
- From 2005 to 2009, as the District’s population grew by 15,862 people, car registrations fell by almost 15,000 vehicles.● The National Building Museum, in its Intelligent Cities Initiative, notes that this reduction in auto use results in as much as $127,275,000 being retained in the local economy each year. (Location 359)

> This point about money beibg left in the locak economy is no small factor

- WHY JOHNNY CAN’T WALK (Location 419)
- In any meaningful discussion about American health (and health care), obesity has to be front and center.■ In the mid-1970s, only about one in ten Americans was obese, which put us where much of Europe is right now. What has happened in the intervening thirty years is astonishing: by 2007, that rate had risen to one in three,8 with a second third of the population “clearly overweight.”9 The childhood obesity rate has almost tripled since 1980 and the rate for adolescents has more than quadrupled.10 According to the rules of the U.S. military, 25 percent of young men and 40 percent of young women are too fat to enlist. (Location 458)
- As recently as 1991, no states had adult obesity rates over 20 percent. By 2007, only one state, Colorado, was under 20 percent. (Location 466)

> Hooray for Colorado??

- The real problem, of course, is not obesity itself, but all the other maladies that obesity causes or makes worse.■ These include coronary disease, hypertension, a variety of cancers—including colorectal and endometrial—gallstones, and osteoarthritis. Excessive weight now kills more Americans than smoking. (Location 470)

> Worse than smoking

- Over the past decade, there has been a series of studies that attribute obesity and its related illnesses directly to the automotive lifestyle and, better yet, to the automotive landscape.● One effort found that for every additional five minutes Atlanta-area residents drove each day, they were 3 percent more likely to be obese.13 Another showed that drivers who switch to public transit drop an average of five pounds.14 A third, in San Diego, reported that 60 percent of residents in a “low-walkable” neighborhood were overweight, compared to only 35 percent in a “high-walkable” neighborhood.15 Another Atlanta study found that “the proportion of obese white males declined from 23 percent to 13 percent as neighborhood residential density increased from less than two to more than eight dwellings per acre.”16 These are careful academic studies that control for age, income, and the other factors that correlate with body mass. (Location 474)

> These are fairly compelling studies to prod my family to get out and walk at every opportunity

- Even if we were to dispute the notion that walking is good for you, it is indisputable that cars kill a lot of people. Car crashes have killed over 3.2 million Americans, considerably more than all of our wars combined.24 They are the leading cause of death for all Americans between the ages of one and thirty-four,25 and their monetary cost to the nation is estimated to be hundreds of billions of dollars annually. (Location 523)
- We don’t bother with hand-wringing over the half-a-percent chance that our lives will end in a car crash26 or the roughly one-in-three chance that we will eventually be seriously injured in one,● since these risks seem unavoidable. But the numbers from other developed nations tell a different story. While the United States in 2004 suffered 14.5 traffic fatalities per 100,000 population, Germany, with its no-speed-limit autobahns, suffered only 7.1. [[Denmark]] rated a 6.8, Japan a 5.8, and the U.K. hit 5.3.27 And who beat them all? New York City, with a rate of 3.1. Indeed, since September 11, 2001, New York has saved more lives in traffic than it lost on 9/11. (Location 529)
- Dan Buettner, the charismatic National Geographic host and bestselling author responsible for The Blue Zones: Lessons for Living Longer from the People Who’ve Lived the Longest. (Location 588)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- “Power Nine: the lessons from the Blue Zones, a cross cultural distillation of the world’s best practices in health and longevity.” (Location 590)

> Create a note of these 9 recommendations

- Lesson One? “Move Naturally.” He explains: “Be active without having to think about it.… Longevity all-stars don’t run marathons or compete in triathlons; they don’t transform themselves into weekend warriors on Saturday morning. Instead, they engage in regular, low-intensity physical activity, often as a part of a daily work routine.” (Location 591)

> This is why we walk & bike places as part of our daily life. And why i find it importsnt to teach / train the kids to do so

- Buettner quotes Robert Kane, M.D., the director of the Minnesota Geriatric Education Center, who says, “Rather than exercising for the sake of exercising, try to make changes to your lifestyle. Ride a bicycle instead of driving. Walk to the store instead of driving.… Build that into your lifestyle.” (Location 593)

> Exactly!

- Enrique Peñalosa, the former mayor of Bogotá, Colombia, sees things in a much simpler light: “God made us walking animals—pedestrians. As a fish needs to swim, a bird to fly, a deer to run, we need to walk, not in order to survive, but to be happy.” (Location 600)

> He was mentioned in [Happy City](https://app.thestorygraph.com/books/35fec23d-8ae2-4928-b7b5-b465f5822acd). Also, I love this quote

- THE WRONG COLOR GREEN (Location 605)
- Unfortunately, as the transportation planner Dan Malouff puts it, “LEED architecture without good urban design is like cutting down the rainforest using hybrid-powered bulldozers.” (Location 709)
- New York is our densest big city and, not coincidentally, the one with the best transit service. All the other subway stations in America put together would not outnumber the 468 stops of the MTA. In terms of resource efficiency, it’s the best we’ve got. But why stop there? Other places, with a variety of densities and transit options, do much better. Sure, New York consumes half the gasoline of Atlanta (326 versus 782 gallons per person per year). But Toronto cuts that number in half again, as does Sydney—and most European cities use only half as much as those places. Cut Europe’s number in half and you end up with Hong Kong.20 If ten Hong Kongers were to move to New York with the goal of keeping their gasoline consumption unchanged, nine of them would have to stay at home. (Location 734)
- Paris is one place that has determined that its future hangs upon its reducing its auto dependence. The city has recently decided to create twenty-five miles of dedicated busways, introduced twenty thousand shared “city bikes” in 1,450 locations, and committed to removing fifty-five thousand parking spaces from the city every year for the next twenty years. These changes sound pretty radical, but they are supported by 80 percent of the population. (Location 741)
- Quality of life—which includes both health and wealth—may not be a function of our ecological footprint, but the two are deeply interrelated. (Location 785)

> Something that could be taken right out of Wealth 101

### PART II THE TEN STEPS OF WALKABILITY (Location 788)

- in Washington, it soon became apparent that there were other benefits to my new car-free lifestyle, besides just convenience. Six months into my autoless diet, I had lost ten pounds through walking and biking, and reduced my stress levels by avoiding traffic. I had gained thousands of dollars in transportation savings and also developed a deeper understanding of my city by experiencing it at a walking and biking pace. Finally, in the ultimate mass-transit payoff, I met my future wife among the masses on a transit platform. It would be fair to say that I was healthier, wealthier, wiser—and happier—all due to what transportation engineers would call a simple mode shift. (Location 803)

> I love this success story

- In these cities, and in most of our nation, the car is no longer an instrument of freedom, but rather a bulky, expensive, and dangerous prosthetic device, a prerequisite to viable citizenship. (Location 813)
- I got rid of my car because my city invited me to and rewarded me in spades. Not everyone who is able to make a similar choice will benefit as I did—certainly not in the spouse department—but the benefits are clear. Independent of the global impacts of reduced tailpipe emissions and energy use, the personal financial and health advantages of losing the car are tremendous. (Location 815)
- More and more Americans are being attracted to places that offer the economy, excitement, and street life that cannot be found in the auto zone. To these people, malls are for teenagers, bicycles are cooler than cars, and a great night out includes being able to drink and not drive. Cities that have recently combined reinvestment in their downtown cores with the creation of transformative transit and biking facilities—like Portland and Denver—are the current relocation places of choice, for those who have a choice. (Location 820)
- When we need a lightbulb or an extension cord, we bike to Logan Circle Hardware rather than driving to Home Depot. All these daily decisions, by us and our many carless neighbors, add up to more money retained within our community. (Location 829)

### THE TEN STEPS OF WALKABILITY (Location 844)

1. Step 1: Put Cars in Their Place. The automobile is a servant that has become a master. For sixty years, it has been the dominant factor in the shaping of our cities. Relegating the car to its proper role is essential to reclaiming our cities for pedestrians, and doing so requires an understanding of how the car and its minions have unnecessarily distorted the way that design decisions are made in American communities. (Location 846)
2. Step 2: Mix the Uses. For people to choose to walk, the walk must serve some purpose. In planning terms, that goal is achieved through mixed use or, more accurately, placing the proper balance of activities within walking distance of each other. While there are exceptions, most downtowns have an imbalance of uses that can be overcome only by increasing the housing supply. (Location 850)
3. Step 3: Get the Parking Right. As Andres Duany puts it, “parking is destiny.” It is the not-so-hidden force determining the life or death of many a downtown. Parking requirements and pricing determine the disposition of more American urban land than any other factor, yet until recently there was not even any theory on how to use parking to a city’s benefit. That theory now exists, and is just beginning to affect policy nationwide. (Location 853)
4. Step 4: Let Transit Work. Walkable neighborhoods can thrive in the absence of transit, but walkable cities rely on it utterly. Communities that hope to become the latter must make transit-planning decisions based upon a number of factors that are routinely neglected. These include the often surprising public support for transit investment, the role of transit in the creation of real estate value, and the importance of design in the success or failure of transit systems. (Location 857)
5. Step 5: Protect the Pedestrian. This is perhaps the most straightforward of the ten steps, but it also has the most moving parts, including block size, lane width, turning motions, direction of flow, signalization, roadway geometry, and a number of other factors that all determine a car’s speed and a pedestrian’s likelihood of getting hit. Most streets in most American cities get at least half of these things wrong. (Location 862)
6. Step 6: Welcome Bikes. Walkable cities are also bikeable cities, because bicycles thrive in environments that support pedestrians and also because bikeability makes driving less necessary. More and more American cities are making big investments in bicycling, with impressive results. (Location 866)
7. Step 7: Shape the Spaces. Perhaps the most counterintuitive discussion in planning, this may be the step that is most often gotten wrong. People enjoy open spaces and the great outdoors. But people also enjoy, and need, a sense of enclosure to feel comfortable as pedestrians. [[Public Spaces]] are only as good as their edges, and too much gray or green—parking or parks—can cause a would-be walker to stay home. (Location 870)
8. Step 8: Plant Trees. Like transit, most cities know that trees are good, but few are willing to pay properly for them. This step attempts to communicate the full value of trees and justify the greater investment that they deserve in almost every American city. (Location 874)
9. Step 9: Make Friendly and Unique Faces. If evidence is to be believed, lively streetscapes have three main enemies: parking lots, drugstores, and star architects. All three seem to favor blank walls, repetition, and a disregard for the pedestrian’s need to be entertained. City design codes, focused on use, bulk, and parking, have only begun to concern themselves with creating active facades that invite walking. (Location 877)
10. Step 10: Pick Your Winners. With the possible exception of Venice, even the most walkable cities are not universally walkable: there are only so many interesting street edges to go around. As a result, however well designed the streets, certain among them will remain principally automotive. This is as it should be, but cities must make a conscious choice about the size and location of their walkable cores, to avoid squandering walkability resources in areas that will never invite pedestrians. (Location 881)

### THE USEFUL WALK

- STEP 1: PUT CARS IN THEIR PLACE
- STEP 2: MIX THE USES
- STEP 3: GET THE PARKING RIGHT STEP 4: LET TRANSIT WORK (Location 885)

### STEP 1: PUT CARS IN THEIR PLACE (Location 890)

- neither was held in thrall by a lobby as powerful as our “Road Gang,” the consortium of “oil, cement, rubber, automobile, insurance, trucking, chemical, and construction industries, consumer and political groups, financial institutions, and media”3 that, along with the military, pushed successfully for new highways. (Location 910)
- Traffic studies are bullshit. They are bullshit for three main reasons: (Location 987)
- We talked about this phenomenon at length in Suburban Nation in 2000, and the seminal text, The Elephant in the Bedroom: Automobile Dependence and Denial, was published by Hart and Spivak in 1993. (Location 997)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- Jan Gehl, the legendary Danish city planner, (Location 1208)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
	- Read something from Jan Gehl
- “Americans are in the habit of never walking if they can ride.” So commented the duke of Orléans, Louis Philippe, as early as 1798 (he became king of the French in 1830).43 This tendency, apparently established in our nation’s earliest days, has had a profound impact on both our physical landscape and our physical selves. Considerably more recently, the French philosopher Bernard-Henry Lévy described our autocentric lifestyle as “a global, total obesity that spares no realm of life, public or private. An entire society that, from the top down, from one end to the other, seems prey to this obscure derangement that slowly causes an organism to swell, overflow, explode.”44 These two comments, made two centuries apart, are more connected than they at first may seem. (Location 1278)
- writings of Ivan Illich, the multinational intellectual who in 1973 wrote the smartest thing that I have yet to read about transportation: (Location 1287)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
	- Read some of his writings
- The model American male devotes more than 1600 hours a year to his car. He sits in it while it goes and while it stands idling. He parks it and searches for it. He earns the money to put down to meet the monthly installments. He works to pay for gasoline, tolls, insurance, taxes, and tickets. He spends four of his sixteen waking hours on the road or gathering the resources for it.… The model American puts in 1600 hours to get 7500 miles: less than five miles per hour. In countries deprived of transportation industry, people manage to do the same, walking wherever they want to go, and they allocate only 3 to 8 percent of their society’s budget to traffic instead of 28 percent. (Location 1295)

> This is disgusting

- This is remarkable. Compared to our colonial ancestors, we throw 25 percent more of our national and personal resources into transportation and we ultimately move no faster. (Location 1301)
- “everybody’s daily radius expands at the expense of being able to drop in on an acquaintance or walk through the park on the way to work.” (Location 1303)
- Illich discovered a hidden physical law: the faster a society moves, the more it spreads out and the more time it must spend moving. (Location 1304)
- Since 1983, when the American sprawl machine really kicked in, the number of miles driven has grown at eight times the population rate.47 While almost one in ten commuters walked to work in Illich’s day, fewer than one in forty do now.48 (Location 1306)

> This fucking depressing

- As disturbing as this transformation is, we must remember that it is not irreversible and—more to the point—not the current experience of every American. Walkable cities, with their dense, vibrant, mixed-use neighborhoods, offer residents a lifestyle that combines superior economic and social opportunity with a transportation cost, in both time and money, that is not necessarily any higher than in Illich’s “countries deprived of transportation industry.” This is particularly true when more citizens are able to live right in the center of town, a subject for the next chapter. (Location 1309)

> Ending on a more positive note

### STEP 2: MIX THE USES (Location 1313)

- What is that balance? Better to ask: what do humans do? Work, shop, eat, drink, learn, recreate, convene, worship, heal, visit, celebrate, sleep: these are all activities that people should not have to leave downtown to accomplish. (Location 1331)
- A great example is Lowell, Massachusetts, which is quickly transforming its downtown through a focus on new housing. I grew up not far from Lowell, and it was known as a place to avoid. Once an industrial mecca, Jack Kerouac’s hometown had lost most of its vitality by the sixties, along with most of its market-rate downtown housing. As recently as 2000, the heart of the city held only about seventeen hundred housing units, of which an astounding 79 percent were subsidized and income restricted. Eleven years later, the number of units has almost doubled and, more significantly, almost 85 percent of the new housing is market rate. That means that the number of non–income-restricted homes has more than quadrupled. According to Adam Baacke, Lowell’s assistant city manager for planning and development, achieving this transformation was essentially a three-step process that could perhaps be best described as politics, permitting, and pathfinding (Location 1345)

> Ask [[Darien Mitchell-Tontar|Darien]] about Lowell, Massachusetts

- Permitting refers to sidestepping the city’s conventional zoning code, which, for example, caused this new artists’ housing to require fourteen distinct variances just to get built. In its place, the city treated each new residential proposal as a “special permit,” and then these permits were “given out like candy” to qualified applicants. Next, the city replaced its stringent requirements for parking with the new rule that developers needed only to identify one parking space per unit, anywhere nearby, that could be leased to their residents. Most of these were spaces in municipal garages that were busy from nine to five but empty at night. (Location 1355)

> After listening to the [[The Ezra Klein Show|Ezra Klein]] Permitting episode, I'm glad to know about a good example where fast tracking of permitting occurred when needed

- To be accurate, Baacke cites one other essential step to the process of attracting downtown residents, what he describes as “a citywide commitment to creating an environment that people want to live in”—which I would call walkability. In a virtuous circle, more walkability begets more housing downtown, which begets more walkability. This chicken-and-egg relationship raises the question of which item to invest in first. The answer, of course, is both. (Location 1364)

> An example of a Virtuous Circle

- two powerful remedies exist for increasing and maintaining affordability. One is well known and the other hardly so. They are inclusionary zoning and granny flats. (Location 1380)
- Inclusionary zoning—requiring a set percentage of all new housing developments to meet affordability criteria—hardly requires a mention, except to say that it works and it is always the right thing to do. Every city should have an inclusionary-zoning ordinance in place, and few currently do, because it has gotten the reputation of being a hidden tax on developers and an impediment to the free market. While these criticisms are technically true, they ignore the real experience of inclusionary-zoning programs in action, which is that they have never stifled development. In some cases, they have been shown to accelerate it.3 And while the libertarians may hate inclusionary zoning, sophisticated developers seem to be just fine with it.● This is probably because the affordable component can qualify a development for federal or state subsidies that make projects more profitable. Some of the biggest inclusionary-zoning programs are in Denver, San Francisco, San Diego, and Boston. The program in wealthy Montgomery County, Maryland, in force since 1974, has built more than ten thousand units of affordable housing. In today’s moribund homebuilding climate, the “pro-business” lobby will no doubt redouble its efforts against inclusionary zoning, but it will do so with scant evidence and ultimately against its own best interests. (Location 1381)
- Granny flats, on the other hand, have yet to gain much traction in America’s cities. Called “accessory dwelling units (ADUs)” by planners, and “backyard cottages” by clever marketers, these apartments are as intelligent as they are illegal. The few ADU ordinances that have been passed in the United States allow single-family houses to place a small apartment in their backyard—often atop a garage on a rear lane—that can be rented in the free market. They are typically opposed by neighbors who are worried about property values. An old college roommate of mine from Los Angeles put it succinctly: “We are afraid that nine illegals will move in.” Happily, there is no evidence that granny flats lower property values and it’s easy to see why. First, they are almost invisible. Second, they provide the homeowners with an income stream that allows them to live in their own home more comfortably. Third, they are of course carefully regulated to avoid the tenement-style use contemplated by my Angeleno friend. (Indeed, the tenant is often a homeowner’s parent or college-age child.) Fourth, they introduce affordability in a dispersed rather than a concentrated way, avoiding the pathologies that sometimes arise from the latter. Finally, they are inevitably well supervised by their landlords, who live just a few feet away. And they are great for walkability, as they increase neighborhood density, putting more feet on the sidewalks, and making transit service and local shopping more viable. They are ideal in those older single-family neighborhoods that can often be found on the edges of downtown, where bungalows and larger homes line walkable streets. Indeed, that’s where they can still be found in places like Charleston and West Hollywood. Granny flats are also big in Canada, where NIMBYs generally hold less influence over local planning matters. Vancouver decriminalized them in 2008 as part of the city’s EcoDensity initiative, and hundreds have already been built and rented. (Location 1392)
- As Adam Baacke suggested, this strategy means building more market-rate housing while also promoting those things that residents want and need: parks and playgrounds, supermarkets and farmers’ markets, cafés and restaurants—and, eventually, good schools—all embraced in a framework of top-notch walkability. Each of these items is a book in its own right, and well beyond this discussion. Suffice it to say that they are necessary, and that the first step to attracting them is to reorient economic development around creating a downtown that has them all. (Location 1428)

### STEP 3: GET THE PARKING RIGHT (Location 1433)

- This chapter exists because of one man. He is in his mid-seventies, green-eyed, gray-bearded, and often pictured riding a bicycle. He holds four degrees from Yale in engineering and economics, and teaches at UCLA, where he was chair of the Department of [[Urban Planning]] and ran the Institute of Transportation Studies. His name is Donald Shoup and, inside an admittedly small circle, he is a rock star. He is alternately hailed as the “Jane Jacobs of parking policy” and the “prophet of parking.” There is even a Facebook group called “The Shoupistas.”1 Shoup has earned his exalted status by being perhaps the first person to really think about how parking works in cities. This effort has led him to some conclusions that have now been backed up with decades of evidence, and he is just beginning to get the attention he deserves. In the words of a former Ventura, [[California]], mayor, Bill Fulton, “Don has been saying the exact same thing for 40 years, and finally the world is listening to him.”2 That doesn’t mean that the world is yet doing what he says, but, with a little luck, that is about to change. (Location 1436)
- Shoup himself notes how the “bible” of city planning, F. Stuart Chapin’s Urban Land Use Planning, doesn’t even mention parking once.● We did better than that in Suburban Nation, but our focus was more on the what than the why, which Shoup has refined to the level of science. (Location 1448)
- WHAT PARKING COSTS AND WHAT IT COSTS US (Location 1456)
- Because it is so plentiful and often free to use, it is easy to imagine that it costs very little. But this is not the case. The cheapest urban parking space in America, an 8½-by-18-foot piece of asphalt on relatively worthless land, costs about four thousand dollars to create—and not much urban land is worthless. The most expensive parking space, in an underground parking garage, can cost forty thousand dollars or more to build. Parking spaces under Seattle’s Pacific Place Shopping Center, built by the city, cost over sixty thousand dollars each.● In between those extremes is the standard aboveground urban parking structure, which can usually be built for between twenty and thirty thousand dollars per space. (Location 1457)
- Given the size of most parking lots, these numbers add up quickly. The twelve-hundred-space Pacific Place garage cost $73 million. Shoup calculates that “the cost of all parking spaces in the U.S. exceeds the value of all cars and may even exceed the value of all roads.”4 There are also the ongoing costs of taxes, management, and maintenance (Location 1463)
- If parking is “free” or underpriced in so much of the United States, who is actually paying for it? The answer is: we all are, whether we use it or not. Shoup puts it this way: Initially, the developer pays for the required parking, but soon the tenants do, and then their customers, and so on, until the price of parking has diffused everywhere in the economy. When we shop in a store, eat in a restaurant, or see a movie, we pay for parking indirectly, because its cost is included in the price of merchandise, meals, and theater tickets. We unknowingly support our cars with almost every commercial transaction we make, because a small share of the money changing hands pays for parking. (Location 1481)
- The ramifications of this situation are disturbing. Nobody can opt out of paying for parking. People who walk, bike, or take transit are bankrolling those who drive. In so doing, they are making driving cheaper and thus more prevalent, which in turn undermines the quality of walking, biking, and transit. (Location 1487)
- Is this beginning to sound familiar? Like roadways in general, all this free and underpriced parking contributes to a circumstance in which a massive segment of our national economy has been disconnected from the free market, such that individuals are no longer able to act rationally. Or, more accurately, in acting rationally, individuals are acting against their own self-interest. (Location 1491)
- All in all, Shoup calculates that the subsidy for employer-paid parking amounts to twenty-two cents per mile driven to work, and thus reduces the price of automotive commuting by a remarkable 71 percent. Eliminating this subsidy would have the same impact as an additional gasoline tax of between $1.27 and $3.74 a gallon.10 That is a price hike that would change many people’s driving habits. (Location 1494)
- This subsidy could perhaps be justified if it produced some greater good for society, but it only produces one benefit: cheaper parking. How does it perform in terms of other important measures? Well, it worsens air and water quality, speeds global warming, increases energy consumption, raises the cost of housing, decreases public revenue, undermines public transportation, increases traffic congestion, damages the quality of the public realm, escalates suburban sprawl, threatens historic buildings, weakens social capital, and worsens public health, to name a few things. (Location 1497)
- ADDICTION MADE LAW But businesses should be allowed to provide parking to lure customers, you might protest. Fair enough. But in America, such parking is not just allowed; it’s required. Some cities, like Monterey Park, [[California]], not only require on-site parking, but insist that it be provided to visitors free of charge.11 These requirements are powerfully disruptive to the way cities function. (Location 1503)
- A true master of the long-form analogy, Shoup describes the situation this way: If cities required restaurants to offer a free dessert with each dinner, the price of every dinner would soon increase to include the cost of dessert. To ensure that restaurants didn’t skimp on the size of the required desserts, cities would have to set precise “minimum calorie requirements.” Some diners would pay for desserts they didn’t eat, and others would eat sugary desserts they wouldn’t have ordered had they paid for them separately. The consequences would undoubtedly include an epidemic of obesity, diabetes, and heart disease. A few food-conscious cities like New York and San Francisco might prohibit free desserts, but most cities would continue to require them. Many people would get angry at even the thought of paying for the desserts they had eaten free for so long. (Location 1507)
- Look at any city, suburban, or rural zoning code, and you will see page after page of rules about parking. Of the six hundred or so land uses that we planners have managed to identify, each has its own minimum parking requirement.13 Shoup documents how these requirements have often been generated from a bare minimum of data and can bear little resemblance to reality.14 A gas station requires 1.5 spaces per nozzle. A bowling alley requires 1 space per employee, plus 5 spaces per lane. A swimming pool requires 1 space per twenty-five hundred gallons of water.● These requirements are then passed from city to city and town to town,15 almost always resulting in the same outcome: too much parking. (Location 1514)
- Even in cities with high residential densities and great transit systems, ample parking encourages driving that would not occur without it. As Shoup likes to say, “Off-street parking requirements are a fertility drug for cars.” (Location 1554)
- In Suburban Nation, we coined the term “Pensacola Parking Syndrome” to describe the fate of so many historic cities that had eventually managed to satisfy their parking demand. They achieved this condition by replacing beautiful old buildings with ugly parking lots—in such number that nobody wanted to go downtown anymore (Location 1558)

> This sounds like what almost happened to the old Fort Collins Post Office as heard at the City Council Meeting

- Certainly, the destruction of architectural masterpieces is one of the most obvious and upsetting manifestations of modern parking pressures. (Location 1561)
- These days, however, with preservationists wielding greater power, the harm perpetrated by parking demands is often more subtle, taking the form not of destruction, but of obstruction: things failing to happen. Most empty urban buildings—historic or otherwise—sit on properties of limited size, with limited opportunities for increasing their parking supply. Yet many changes in use bring with them an uptick in the parking requirement. Shoup notes how replacing a defunct furniture store with a new bicycle shop would typically require tripling the size of the parking lot.● Where are those spaces supposed to come from? The result, of course, is that nothing gets done and old buildings stay empty. (Location 1565)
- Similarly, a thriving restaurant that wants to add sidewalk dining—something every city now says it wants—can’t do so without increasing its parking supply, often an impossibility.27 The only path to providing more parking in urban areas is typically to replace surface parking lots with multistory decks, at tremendous cost. That money is increasingly difficult to come by. (Location 1571)
- This parking-induced commercial stasis is only half the story. The other half is the great burden that parking minimums place on affordability, especially for housing, (Location 1574)
- Developers in San Francisco estimate that the city’s one-space-per-unit requirement adds 20 percent to the cost of affordable housing. Shoup calculates that eliminating this requirement would allow 24 percent more San Franciscans to buy homes. Even the city’s chief comprehensive planner, Amit Ghosh, admits that “we’re forcing people to build parking that people cannot afford.” (Location 1575)
- The larger question is why the future residents of Alma Place—Walk Score 95, for God’s sake—should need parking at all. Does a household located three blocks from a train station in one of America’s most walkable and employment-loaded communities need to own a car? Did I mention that the train station is flanked by more than three hundred commuter parking spaces that all sit empty overnight?31 The answer is not that future residents would come with cars, but that current residents were worried about spillover parking on their streets. (Location 1583)
- Even more troubling was the city’s refusal to allow the developer to charge for parking. The housing corporation was prohibited from charging a parking fee of one hundred dollars per month, which would have reduced nondrivers’ rents by about 10 percent.● So, even among the city’s poorest citizens, the pedestrians are subsidizing the drivers. (Location 1588)
- What’s most interesting—and perhaps a bit frustrating—about this solution is that it does not address the parking supply directly. Every one of these cities still has a downtown parking requirement, some quite high.35 But instead of providing parking, businesses are only required to pay for it, which allows the parking to be located in the right place and, importantly, shared. When parking is no longer the exclusive property of an individual business, it becomes much more efficient. A space that serves an office during the day can serve a restaurant in the evening and a resident overnight. So, by simultaneously setting parking minimums and outlawing private parking lots, cities are able to indirectly reduce the amount of parking that has to be provided. Eventually, as real life determines the number of shared spaces that are actually needed, a city can adjust its in-lieu fees downward. Or it can keep them steady and pocket the difference. (Location 1609)
- For large employers, [[California]] has pioneered a second powerful strategy for managing parking, called “parking cash-out.” The [[California]] Health and Safety Code requires many businesses that offer free employee parking to give their workers the option of trading that parking space for its cash equivalent. This is an ingenious law, because it is all carrot and no stick. Cities are required to reduce each business’s parking requirement by the number of employees who cash out, thus placing no greater burden on the employer, while providing a great incentive for alternative transportation. (Location 1616)
- These two strategies, in-lieu payments and parking cash-out, are a great start at decoupling the cost of parking from all the other activities in which it has become imbedded—that is, hidden—so that parking demand can once again behave according to the principles of the free market. This concept of decoupling makes so much sense that one would expect it to have become commonplace. Instead, it is rare, because residents of places like Palo Alto fear that costly off-street parking will cause bargain seekers to overwhelm their precious curbside parking. And they are correct in this fear, because most cities lack a comprehensive parking policy that deals with off-street and on-street parking together. Until this mandate is met, in-lieu payments and parking cash-out can serve as good transitional strategies toward a more ambitious goal, which is the elimination of off-street parking requirements entirely. (Location 1622)
- Abolishing the off-street parking requirement is one of the three cornerstones of Shoup’s theory, because it would allow the market to determine how much parking is needed. He notes that “removing off-street parking requirements will not eliminate off-street parking, but will instead stimulate an active commercial market for it.”37 This would bring U.S. policy more in line with that of Western Europe. Shoup describes the situation as follows: American cities put a floor under the parking supply to satisfy the peak demand for free parking, and then cap development density to limit vehicle trips. European cities, in contrast, often cap the number of parking spaces to avoid congesting the roads and combine this strategy with a floor on allowed development density to encourage walking, cycling, and public transport. That is, Americans require parking and limit density, while Europeans require density and limit parking. (Location 1629)

> This european comparison is excellent

- In Manhattan, developers do not feel any need to provide parking for their apartments, stores, and offices, so the outcome is more Düsseldorf than Dallas. (Location 1638)
- Let’s take Manhattan. Off-street parking is roughly $15 for the first hour in most locations, while curbside parking costs just $3. Is it any wonder that the city’s streets are choked with double-parked cars and people hunting for parking? Underpriced curb parking is no fairer than giving random discounts on other municipal services like water or electricity based upon who circles the block the longest, and just as counterproductive. A study of six different urban sites found that roughly a third of all traffic congestion was made up of people trying to find a parking spot. (Location 1646)
- Some version of this condition exists in most American cities. In downtown Chicago, curbside parking costs one-thirteenth as much as off-street parking.40 The outcome of this market inefficiency is not just congestion and all its attendant woes—pollution, time wasted, slow emergency response—but also reduced revenue to area businesses. This counterintuitive fact can be surprising to the businesses themselves, who routinely fight bitterly against any effort to raise meter rates. These merchants forget the origin of the parking meter, in Oklahoma City, as a tool to improve business revenue. Shoup quotes an American City reporter from 1937: Merchants and shoppers are both in favor of them. When one side of the street has them, merchants on the other side demand them. When one town has them, the merchants of nearby towns demand them, showing that they draw out-of-town shoppers rather than driving them away.41 (Location 1652)
- Why were these first meters so popular? Because they reduced overcrowding and hassle, but also because they increased turnover, ensuring more customers per hour. The result was more sales and dramatically higher downtown property values.42 The same calculus holds true today, as underpriced curbside parking scares away potential customers who believe that there is no place to park, even as nearby parking lots sit half empty. As Shoup notes, “If it takes only five minutes to drive somewhere else, why spend fifteen cruising for parking?” (Location 1660)
- I encountered just this condition in Lowell, where on-street parking became free at 6:00 p.m., while parking structures still charged admission. The result was that residents coming home from work would rush into the parking spaces on restaurant row, leaving no room for the dinner crowd. (Location 1665)
- THE RIGHT PRICE Which leads us to Shoup’s second key recommendation, that on-street parking be priced at a level that results in an 85 percent occupancy rate at all times.44 This number may seem a bit low, but it corresponds with roughly one empty space per block face, just the right amount to ensure Daddy Warbucks a spot near the furrier. Because it is precisely the shoppers with dollars to spare who have the most to offer your Main Street merchants. (Location 1668)
- Shoup reports on how, by 1990, Aspen’s downtown merchants were suffering from overcrowded curbside parking. The city responded by building an expensive parking garage, but that structure sat half empty as the parking crush continued. Finally, the city proposed charging one dollar per hour on-street, and all hell broke loose. (Location 1675)
- Opponents, mostly local employees, mounted a noisy “Honk if You Hate Paid Parking” campaign. This was quickly met by a rogue “Honk if You Love Dirty Air” campaign, in reference to all the cruising and double parking that had become the norm. Paid parking eventually prevailed and the new rates took effect in 1995. Almost immediately, the opponents realized that they had been wrong. Now the municipal parking structure is well used, the on-street parking and cruising are under control, the businesses are thriving, and the city receives over half a million dollars a year in new parking revenue, most of it from tourists. (Location 1678)
- In Ventura, Shoupista Mayor Bill Fulton introduced on-street parking rates of one dollar per hour, aiming toward 85 percent occupancy.47 In addition to being mayor, Fulton is a city planner, and his blog is worth following. (Location 1683)
	- [x] Check out his blog ✅ 2024-10-11
- What happened over the next decade was as shocking in reality as it was predictable in theory. Old Pasadena staged a brilliant revival, while Westwood Village entered a steady economic decline that continues to this day. Now residents of Westwood drive to Old Pasadena to shop. Westwood’s curbs are crumbling, while the sidewalks of Old Pasadena boast new tree grates, fancy lighting, and street furniture. Not only does each parking meter in Pasadena generate an average of $1,712 in annual revenue for the city, but sales tax receipts are way up. Indeed, the city’s sales-tax revenue tripled in the first six years after the meters were installed. (Location 1731)
- While it is always easy to park in Old Pasadena, the average shopper in Westwood Village circles for 8.3 minutes before either finding a spot or giving up. Shoup delights in telling us how Westwood cruisers cumulatively log a total of 426 vehicle hours per day, covering more distance than a trip across the United States. Over a year, this adds up to thirty-eight trips around the globe. (Location 1736)
- This creative leap leads us to Shoup’s third cornerstone, the institution of “parking benefit districts” that put meter revenues to work locally.60 In addition to improving sidewalks, trees, lighting, and street furniture, these districts can bury overhead wires, renovate storefronts, hire public service officers, and of course keep everything spic-and-span. They can also construct the public parking lots a block away that serve employees and shopper overflow. (Location 1755)
- “If nonresidents pay for curb parking, and the city spends its money to benefit the residents, charging for curb parking can become a popular policy rather than the political third rail it often is today.” (Location 1762)
- The third rail that threatens to kill Shoup’s two main proposals is not about where the money goes, but about the fact that it is just so hard to take away anybody’s free anything. This is the reason that on-street parking remains free of charge in much of New York City, of all places. Shoup is not ignorant of this fact, quoting George Costanza’s famous rant: “My father didn’t pay for parking, my mother, my brother, nobody. It’s like going to a prostitute. Why should I pay when, if I apply myself, maybe I can get it for free.” (Location 1766)

> It is funny to use Seinfeld to explain a point

- What was certainly missing, among all the parking policy, was a parking plan, and such a comprehensive plan is ultimately what every “over-parked” place in America needs. This plan must include on-street pricing, off-street pricing, in-lieu payments supporting a collective supply, parking benefit districts, and residential permits where needed. Above all, it must be managed comprehensively with an eye toward community success, not just meter revenue. Parking is a public good, and it must be managed for the public good. Such management takes full advantage of the free market but—this is important—it is not the free market.64 The single largest land use in every American city is very much that city’s business. (Location 1777)
- Communities can only be their best if on-street parking, off-street parking, parking permits, and parking regulations are all managed collectively. (Location 1800)

### STEP 4: LET TRANSIT WORK (Location 1804)

- Now that we have begun to understand the true costs of that choice—including watching our automotive liberation obliterated by congestion—most Americans are ready for something different. According to America’s Finest News Source, The Onion, “98 percent of U.S. commuters favor public transportation for others.” This fictional article described a campaign mounted by the American Public Transportation Association—slogan: “Take the Bus … I’ll Be Glad You Did”—that was remarkably insightful in its recognition of the impacts of one person’s transit on another’s traffic, known as the “multiplier effect.” In San Francisco, for example, every passenger mile traveled by rail replaces nine miles traveled by car.8 I can also recommend The Onion’s video report: “Tired of traffic? A new DOT report urges drivers ‘honk.’” (Location 1851)
	- #add-book-to-read
	- #add-video-to-watch
- In his study “Raise My Taxes, Please!” Todd Litman of the Victoria Transport Policy Institute compared the fifty largest U.S. cities, of which seven were deemed to have “high-quality” transit service and forty-three were found wanting. He determined that each resident of the seven high-quality cities paid roughly $370 more per year for public transportation than a resident of the other forty-three, but saved $1,040 in vehicle, parking, and road costs. These costs were measured in terms of actual dollars spent on goods, services, and taxes, and ignored all the additional indirect savings surrounding congestion, safety, pollution, and health. (Location 1873)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- Neighborhood structure refers to the presence or absence of real neighborhoods, which are technically defined as being compact, diverse, and walkable. A true neighborhood has a center and an edge, and contains a wide variety of activities in close proximity within an armature of pedestrian-friendly streets and [[Public Spaces]]. A traditional city is composed principally of these neighborhoods, interspersed periodically with districts like universities and airports, and corridors like rivers and railways. If you live in an older city, you can probably identify its neighborhoods, like New York’s West Village, Tribeca, and SoHo. (Location 1886)
- Compact, diverse, walkable neighborhoods were the basic building blocks of cities from the first nonnomadic settlements over ten thousand years ago until the height of the auto age. What took shape around the measure of the human stride flourished with the advent of rail transport, since the distance between rail stops reinforced the nodal structure of the neighborhood pattern. Only the hegemony of the automobile, with its unprecedented capacity to equalize the entire landscape, allowed the abandonment of the neighborhood in favor of sprawl, which is defined as being vast, homogeneous, and unwalkable. And since it is organized around the automobile, sprawl has no use for transit. As the administrator of any suburban transit agency will tell you, running buses in sprawl is a lose-lose scenario, in which heavy subsidy yields inadequate service. (Location 1891)
- Far more common are linear corridor systems, also known as streetcars, trolleys, or trams. These distinguish themselves from conventional light-rail systems by their slower speed and frequent stops; they are not rapid transit, but “pedestrian accelerators,” (Location 1974)
- If done properly, they are also “place makers,” which is another way of saying “land-appreciation tools.” Hales reminds us that most old U.S. streetcar lines were short-term value-creation strategies by real estate developers with property to sell.21 The same economics still hold sway and need to be pondered deeply by cities considering new streetcar lines. (Location 1977)
- Portland’s streetcar line is roughly half the length of Memphis’s seven-mile system, but it connects to fifty-three miles of MAX light rail. And, importantly, Portland’s system was instituted hand in hand with a commitment to “a host of other strategies and policies, including higher density, neighborhood-based urban design, elimination of minimum parking requirements, and basically the whole list of things that add up to walkability,” says Hales. “You can’t just drop in a streetcar.” (Location 1991)
- Portland’s streetcar succeeded as a tool for increasing urban vibrancy because it was first a tool for neighborhood development. This fact is important for two reasons: first, because it is a mistake to promote a streetcar in the absence of a major real estate opportunity and, second, because such an opportunity suggests the presence of private parties who stand to benefit tremendously from the investment. And these parties should want to help pay for it. (Location 2008)
- These few lines should be earmarked for a higher level of service, and indeed only provided with service if certain conditions can be met. These conditions are what is lacking in much of transit today: urbanity, clarity, frequency, and pleasure. (Location 2040)
- Urbanity means locating all significant stops right in the heart of the action, not a block away and, God forbid, not across a parking lot. This is the problem of the last one hundred yards that haunts so many a bus or train station. Riders should be able to fall into the bus from a stool at a coffee shop.31 If the dimensional requirements of your vehicle do not allow this, then you need a different vehicle. And without true walkability on both ends of the line, your system is a nonstarter. (Location 2042)
- Clarity means a route that is a simple line or loop, with as few diversions as possible. This not only expedites [[travel]]—and limits frustration—but also allows riders to form a mental image of the path, so important to their comfort. (Location 2046)
- Frequency is the thing that most transit service gets wrong. People hate to look at schedules almost as much as they hate waiting, so ten-minute headways are the standard for any line that hopes to attract a crowd. If you can’t fill a bus at that rate, then get a van. GPS-enabled time-to-arrival clocks at stations (and smartphone apps) are also essential, and particularly helpful after hours. What after hours means depends on the circumstances, but staying popular may require short headways all evening. The byword here is to provide service frequently or not at all. Limiting service due to limited ridership is a death spiral that few transit lines survive. (Location 2050)

> The Maxline is struggling from this perspective. And Transfort in general

- Pleasure is the mandate that is most often overlooked by transit officials, yet the search for its attainment is at the heart of so many human choices. As Darrin Nordahl argues convincingly in My Kind of Transit, public transportation is “a mobile form of [[Public Spaces|public space]],”32 and can provide so many of the benefits we seek from our time spent out of the house. When I first read Nordahl’s book, I was ready to dismiss this concept as so much sentimental prattle, but then I was reminded that I owe my own marriage to a train ride. What does a social, fun, pleasurable experience mean for transit design? Seats that face inward rather than at the back of someone’s head. Big, nontinted windows that open wide—or no glass at all, as in San Diego. Wifi. And, yes, even novel vehicles, like double-decker buses, that add capacity and charm while reducing turning radii. (Location 2055)
- As Darrin Nordahl argues convincingly in My Kind of Transit, public transportation is “a mobile form of [[Public Spaces|public space]],”32 and can provide so many of the benefits we seek from our time spent out of the house. (Location 2056)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- In short, the imperative of competitive transit has a hard side and a soft side. The hard side is all about not wasting people’s time and the soft side is about making them happy. If you can commit to doing both, then you can get people out of their cars. (Location 2063)
- If your goals are efficiency and pleasure, rail beats bus hands down. With expedited paths, [[trains]] are almost always faster, and most [[trains]] are way cuter than your average diesel-belching bus. Even the latest zero-emissions buses are typically an intimidating presence in the streetscape compared to a delicate tram car. That’s why [[trains]] cost more. Or do they? (Location 2066)
- That said, not all bus systems are duds—far from it. The most remarkable one nationally may be Boulder’s, an inexpensive network that confounds conventional transit wisdom in a number of important ways. Thanks to its system of cleverly branded routes—including the Hop, Skip, and Jump, with each route getting its own color—the city is living up to its motto of “Breathing Required, Driving Optional.” Despite gaining ten thousand new residents and twelve thousand new jobs since 1994, the city has seen zero increase in its total vehicle miles driven. Much of the system’s success comes from the way that it is marketed. Households buy a $120 EcoPass that gives all members free rides all year—and also gives them special treatment at local stores, restaurants, and bars. As a result, an entire EcoPass culture has evolved, in which driving just isn’t as cool. (Location 2087)

> I want to try Boulder's system

- ZIP IT IF YOU CAN Every city wants Zipcar. Does Zipcar want them back? Probably not. By all means, invite them to dinner, give them the key to your city, and offer them all of the concessions they usually ask, including dedicated parking spaces in the best locations—as many as they want. But understand that this superficially pro-driving enterprise cannot thrive in your city unless you have already moved beyond the pro-driving paradigm. Because if everybody has a car, nobody needs one. If the design of your city still makes daily driving a prerequisite to viable citizenship, then you are not yet ready for urban car-share. Some people worry that car-share might undermine public transportation, taxis, walking, or biking, but the opposite is true. It is only in the driving-optional cities with good public transportation, taxis, walking, and biking that car-share can thrive. It is also in these same cities that car-share might push someone over the tipping point into ditching their car, as it did me. So, here’s one good test: Go downtown. Stick out your hand. Does a taxi stop? If so, you are probably ready for Zipcar. And then go for it, as the benefits are tremendous. After a year of service, Zipcar Baltimore polled its members and found that they were walking 21 percent more, biking 14 percent more, and taking transit 11 percent more than before joining. Only 12 percent of members had taken more than five driving trips in the previous month, compared to 38 percent before joining Zipcar. About a fifth of members had sold their cars, and almost half claimed that Zipcar had saved them from having to buy a car.36 There is only one challenge to Zipcar, which is that they are too smart to locate in unwalkable cities. (Location 2098)
- THE SAFE WALK (Location 2112)

### STEP 5: PROTECT THE PEDESTRIAN (Location 2115)

- Will the pedestrian survive? Or, more precisely: Will potential walkers feel adequately protected against being run over, enough so that they make the choice to walk? This is clearly the central question of any discussion of walkable cities. As all the other steps make clear, pedestrian safety is not enough. But it is essential, and also so often needlessly botched by the people who build our cities. These failures stem from two principal sources: a lack of concern for the pedestrian and a fundamental misunderstanding within the professions about what makes streets safe. The first cause is political, and can be overcome through advocacy. The second cause is technical, and can be overcome by setting the record straight. (Location 2118)
- In his landmark book Great Streets, the urbanist Alan Jacobs (no relation to Jane) lays out figure-ground maps, each a mile square, of more than forty world cities. With streets in white and blocks in black, these drawings allow us to understand and compare the patterns underlying some of the planet’s most walkable and unwalkable places. The lessons that emerge are unmistakable, especially as you compare cities that you have had the pleasure or misfortune to visit. The most obvious of these lessons pertains to block size. Generally speaking, the cities with the smallest blocks are the ones best known for walkability, while those with the largest blocks are known as places without street life (Location 2124)
- The preindustrial neighborhoods of downtown Boston and lower Manhattan, like their European counterparts, have blocks that average less than two hundred feet long (and the cranky medieval street patterns to match). The most walkable grids, like Philadelphia’s and San Francisco’s, have blocks that average less than four hundred feet in length. And then there are the pedestrian-free zones, like Irvine, [[California]], where many blocks are one thousand feet long or longer. (Location 2130)
- There are, as always, exceptions. Much of [[Germany]] has surprisingly large blocks. But its street maps are effectively a lie, since so many [[Germany]] blocks are rife with interior passages and courtyards that create a hidden network of pedestrian life. The blocks of Los Angeles aren’t much bigger than [[Spain]]’s, but the latter’s streets aren’t engineered for high speeds. Los Angeles demonstrates that it is possible to make a small-block city unwalkable, but the larger pool of evidence confirms that it is much harder to make a big-block city walkable. (Location 2133)
- I remember the first time I visited Las Vegas, which, aside from the Strip and the old main street (Fremont Street) is a place where nobody walks. Driving into town in my rented Mustang, I checked the Hertz map for the path to my hotel. In those days, rental-car maps typically showed only a city’s major roads, skipping the fine-grained network in between for simplicity. As I entered the city, I was astounded to learn that there wasn’t a fine-grained network in between: the dumbed-down rental-car map was the city. This explained a lot. (Location 2137)

> Totally unsurprised. This doesnt bode well for my trip to Las Vegas

- There are two main reasons why smaller blocks make for better cities. (Location 2141)
- The first has less to do with safety and more with convenience: the more blocks per square mile, the more choices a pedestrian can make and the more opportunities there are to alter your path to visit a useful address such as a coffee shop or dry cleaner. These choices also make walking more interesting, while shortening the distances between destinations. (Location 2142)
- The second, more important, reason is that bigger blocks mean fewer streets and thus bigger streets. Presuming a similar traffic volume, a city with twice the block size requires each street to hold twice as many driving lanes. The typical street in downtown Portland, with its two-hundred-foot-per-side blocks, holds two lanes of traffic.● The typical street in downtown Salt Lake City, with blocks over six hundred feet per side, holds six lanes of traffic.■ And six-lane streets are much more dangerous than two-lane streets. (Location 2144)
- The definitive study on this topic was completed by Wesley Marshall and Norman Garrick at the University of Connecticut, who compared data from twenty-four medium-sized [[California]] cities. They looked at more than 130,000 car crashes that occurred over nine years, and were able to divide the subjects into twelve “safer” cities and twelve “less safe” cities. Among these two groups, they found no single variable to be more predictive of injury and death than block size. Blocks in the dozen safer cities averaged eighteen acres in size, while blocks in the dozen less safe cities averaged thirty-four acres in size. All told, a doubling of block size corresponded with a tripling of fatalities. (Location 2149)

> This is crazy. Luckily, Fort Collins has fairly small blocks

- Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to introduce you to the second great misunderstanding that lies at the root of most urban degradation today: widening a city’s streets in the name of safety is like distributing handguns to deter crime. (Location 2221)

> Such a vivid analogy

- As any London pedestrian will tell you, a twenty-mph sign does not a twenty-mph driver make. Most motorists drive the speed at which they feel comfortable, which is the speed to which the road has been engineered. “20’s Plenty” is most useful as a first step to slower design speeds. Once twenty-mph zones become more common, we may finally be able to convince the engineers to design twenty-mph streets. (Location 2251)
- Risk homeostasis describes how people automatically adjust their behavior to maintain a comfortable level of risk. (Location 2273)
- It explains why poisoning deaths went up after childproof caps were introduced—people stopped hiding their medicines—and why the deadliest intersections in America are typically the ones you can navigate with one finger on the steering wheel and a cellphone at your ear. (Location 2274)
- The best risk-homeostasis story comes from Sweden, a nation that is obsessed with traffic safety. If you look at the bar chart of Swedish traffic fatalities through the years, most of what you see is not surprising. There is the rise in deaths into the sixties, the decline as seatbelts are introduced, the leveling off in the eighties, and then a further decline as airbags become standard equipment. But, wait a minute, what happened in 1967? In a single year, fatalities dropped from more than thirteen hundred to fewer than eleven hundred, a decline of 17 percent. It turns out that, on March 9, 1967, Sweden switched from driving on the left-hand side of the road to driving on the right-hand side of the road.10 As might be expected, everyone was quite worried about this transition. The steering wheels were on the wrong side of the cars, a ton of signals and signs all had to be moved at once, and the government feared a bloodbath. But, precisely because people were scared, car crashes dropped precipitously, and didn’t return to the prior level until 1970. The lesson from this experience is clear: if you value the lives of your countrymen, you should switch sides of the road every three years. Since that is unlikely to win popular support, let’s turn to the larger lesson: the safest roads are those that feel the least safe, demanding more attention from drivers. (Location 2276)
- If greater perceived danger leads to safer driving, how do you make the safest streets in the world? That question was probably best answered by Hans Monderman (1945–2008), the Dutch traffic engineer who pioneered two wonderful and interrelated concepts: naked streets and shared space. While not appropriate everywhere, these techniques have a lot to teach us as we work to improve our cities. (Location 2300)
- Naked streets refers to the concept of stripping a roadway of its signage—all of it, including stop signs, signals, and even stripes. Far from creating mayhem, this approach appears to have lowered crash rates wherever it has been tried. Following Monderman’s advice, the Danish town of Christiansfeld removed all signs and signals from its main intersection, and watched the number of serious accidents each year fall from three to zero. The British county of Wiltshire, home to Stonehenge, pulled the centerline off a narrow street, and witnessed a 35 percent drop in the number of collisions.11 Drivers passed oncoming cars at a 40 percent greater distance than on a striped street, even though the striped roadway was wider. (Location 2303)
- Monderman described his approach this way: “The trouble with traffic engineers is that when there’s a problem with a road, they always try to add something. To my mind, it’s much better to remove things.”13 This makes particular sense in the Netherlands, where there is a tradition of reticent roadways—you are unlikely to see a stop sign there14—but the idea has also spread to Austria, [[France]], Germany, Spain, and Sweden.15 Naked streets are also beginning to appear in the United States, typically in conjunction with Monderman’s other big idea, shared space. In some ways, shared space is simply the extension of the naked streets concept to include the elimination of physical cues and barriers as well, such as curbs and distinct materials for streets and sidewalks. The goal is to create an environment of such utter ambiguity that cars, bicyclists, and pedestrians all come together in one big mixing bowl of humanity. (Location 2309)
- David Owen notes, “This sounds to many people like a formula for disaster.” Not so: “The clear experience in the (mainly) European cities that have tried it has been that increasing the ambiguity of urban road spaces actually lowers car speeds, reduces accident rates, and improves the lives of pedestrians.”16 In Monderman’s terms, “Chaos equals cooperation.” (Location 2318)
- Monderman was a man with the courage of his convictions. One of his favorite tricks with television reporters was to speak to them while standing in front of a shared-space intersection he had built in the Dutch village of Oosterwolde. Without missing a beat, he would blindly walk backward into the flow of traffic, parting it like the Red Sea. (Location 2322)
	- Tags: #add-video-to-watch
- The other way that cities increase traffic flow at the expense of pedestrians is with the “right on red” rule. God knows, I love this as a driver, but, as Jan Gehl puts it, “the widespread American practice of allowing cars to ‘turn right on red’ at intersections is unthinkable in cities that want to invite people to walk and bicycle.”27 It is banned in the Netherlands. (Location 2455)
		- Tags: #favorite
- One recent safety innovation, just implemented in Washington, D.C., is the leading pedestrian interval, or LPI, better known as the “pedestrian head start.” With the LPI, the “walk” signal appears about three seconds prior to the green light, allowing pedestrians to claim the intersection before cars do. This is the ideal form of walkability enhancer, since it improves both pedestrian safety and pedestrian convenience, rather than pitting the two against each other. (Location 2461)

> I have noticed that Fort Collins has implemented this. It really is a smart feature

- with signals as with road design, the safest approach may turn out to be “less is more,” as embodied in the four-way stop sign. What if, instead of simply telling drivers when to go, we asked them to think for themselves? Four-way stop signs, which require motorists to approach each intersection as a negotiation, turn out to be much safer than signals.31 Drivers slow down, but never have to wait for more than a few seconds, and pedestrians and bicyclists are generally waved through first.● Clearly, these are not possible on the busiest streets, but most cities have many intersections that would benefit from the removal of their signals in favor of stop signs. (Location 2466)
- If stop signs are so much better than signals, why do signals still proliferate on local low-traffic streets? Indeed, why does the typical corner include not just a signal in each direction, but a distinct signal in each direction over every single lane of traffic, such that the typical urban four-lane intersection now bristles with a good dozen lights? In the sixties, one signal hanging over the middle of the crossing was enough. The answer may lie in who makes the rules. As director of the Davenport, Iowa, Design Center, Darrin Nordahl did a little digging, and found out that the firm the city hired to design its signalization regime was the same firm who then sold the city its signals. Enough said. (Location 2471)

### STEP 6: WELCOME BIKES (Location 2478)

- Perhaps the greatest revolution currently under way in—only some—American cities is the dramatic rise in biking (Location 2482)
- Almost every American city is currently well stocked with would-be bike riders who are only waiting for an invitation to hop on the saddle, and it is likely that those cities that invest now in (relatively inexpensive) biking infrastructure will have a meaningful advantage in attracting the next generation of new residents. Millennials routinely cite biking as an important motivator in location choice, and today’s seventeen-year-old is a third less likely to have a driver’s license than a baby boomer was at that age. (Location 2484)

> This prediction may be part of why Fort Collins has experienced so much growth

- Take a step back and it’s easy to see why. A street with bikes, once the drivers get used to them, is a place where cars proceed more cautiously. And a city with bikes everywhere is a different kind of city. As bike lanes have been added along New York’s avenues, injuries to pedestrians have dropped by about a third. Indeed, on Broadway and on Ninth Avenue, reported accidents and injuries to all users were cut in half,2 outpacing even the advocates’ expectations. (Location 2497)
- Safety is but one of many reasons why our cities need more bicycles. As anyone who has taken advantage of a good biking city will tell you, cycling has got to be the most efficient, healthful, empowering, and sustainable form of transportation there is. Using the same amount of energy as walking, a bicycle will take you three times farther.3 Bicycle commuters enjoy about double the amount of daily physical activity of drivers.4 Bikes are cheap, and the fuel is free. And it’s fun. As one happy biker put it, “It’s like being able to golf to work.” (Location 2502)
- I have friends who bike to and from their offices instead of joining a gym, saving time and money and generally having a great time of it. (Yes, they have showers at work.) As Robert Hurst says in The Cyclist’s Manifesto, “If you need to exercise, and you need to get around, why not do both at the same time?” (Location 2508)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- Compared to the car, the bicycle’s spatial demands are minimal. Ten bikes can park in the space of a single car, and the typical bike lane handles five to ten times the traffic volume of a car lane twice its width. (Location 2511)
- And if every American biked an hour per day instead of driving, the United States would cut its gasoline consumption by 38 percent and its greenhouse gas emissions by 12 percent, meeting the Kyoto Accords instantly. (Location 2513)

> This seems like a crucial component of climate change improvement

- In Washington, I have found that there is simply no faster, easier, or more convenient way to get around. If I have an appointment almost anywhere in the city, I just set my alarm for fifteen minutes prior and I will be there on time. Were I to take transit or drive and park, that would require twice as long. Just the other morning, I biked the two miles to my doctor’s office, had a checkup, and biked home, all in half an hour. Two caveats: I have America’s only on-time doctor and I had to take a shower when I got home—it’s August. (Location 2516)
- As one compares different biking and nonbiking places, it is interesting to see that climate plays a surprisingly small role. Canada’s Yukon Territory—up there next to Alaska—has twice the rate of bicycle commuters as [[California]].9 In October 2011, icy Minneapolis was named “America’s #1 Bike City” by Bicycling magazine, with 4 percent of all work trips being made by bike.10 Nor is topography a significant factor: San Francisco has three times the ridership of relatively flat Denver. (Location 2520)
- As John Pucher and Ralph Buehler suggest in their report to the Institute of Transport and Logistic Studies, the main reasons that Canadians “cycle about three times more than Americans” are “Canada’s higher urban densities and mixed-use development, shorter trip distances … [and] higher costs of owning, driving and parking a car”12—all conditions associated with city living. Second, and also cited by the authors, are “safer cycling conditions and more extensive cycling infrastructure”●—in other words, streets that have been designed to welcome bikes. (Location 2526)
- Any such investigation probably has to begin with the Netherlands, which has the planet’s highest percentage of people cycling. The Dutch statistics are staggering. Fully 27 percent of all trips are made on bicycle. School buses are uncommon, as the vast majority of high schoolers bike to class.13 Indeed, 95 percent of ten-to-twelve-year-olds bicycle to school at least some of the time.14 Women take more bike trips than men, and roughly a fourth of all trips made by the elderly are on a bicycle.15 In Amsterdam, a city of 783,000, about 400,000 people are out riding their bikes on any given day.16 In a telling detail, spandex sightings are exceedingly rare; nobody wears anything special to bicycle, certainly not a helmet. (Location 2537)
- Bike safety, etiquette, and respect for bikers are taught from an early age. Drivers learn to reach for the door handle with their opposite hand, so that they cannot exit the car without checking for bikes. Food shopping is more likely to occur daily than weekly, to fit it in the bike basket. As Russell Shorto notes in The New York Times, biking means that the Dutch eat fresher bread. (Location 2544)
- Biking in the Netherlands is a virtuous circle, in which more bike paths—the most in the world—has led to more biking, which has led to more bike paths. (Location 2548)
- It is empowering to know that things were not always this way. Amsterdam’s chief planner, Zef Hemel, told Shorto that “back in the 1960s, we were doing the same thing as America, making cities car-friendly.” He credits Jane Jacobs, of all people, with the transformation of Dutch thinking.18 It’s nice to know that somebody was listening to her back then. (Location 2549)
- Like the Netherlands, [[Denmark]] has also seen a revolution in cycling, much of it recent, and most of it spearheaded by government investment in bike infrastructure. In [[Denmark|Copenhagen]], most of the city’s major four-lane streets have been converted to two lanes plus two bike paths. As a sign of the city’s priorities, these bike lanes are always cleared of snow before the driving lanes are. The minimum recommended bike path width is over eight feet,19 which makes America’s five-footers look pretty dinky. (Location 2552)
- The impact of this investment has been profound. Forty years ago, peak-hour motorists in [[Denmark|Copenhagen]] outnumbered bicyclists by three to one. In 2003, the two modes reached parity, and now cycling is the most popular way around town.20 Forty percent more people bike to work than drive. (Location 2556)
- Closer to home, and supposedly part of America, the most bike friendly of our sizeable cities has got to be Portland. Although no match for Europe, Portland has accomplished something remarkable. A mere fifteen years ago, only 1 percent of Portlanders biked to work; today, that number tops 8 percent.22 Between 1993 and 2008, peak-season bike traffic across the Willamette River climbed from about 3,600 trips per day to more than 16,700. (Location 2560)
- This change is palpable. I was recently e-mailed some photos of the city’s morning commute and I had to ask the sender: “What was this, Bike to Work Day?” No, he said, it was just Tuesday. (Location 2564)
- As in Europe, this change was led by an investment in bicycle infrastructure, but at a limited cost. According to Mia Birk, the city’s bicycle coordinator at the time, “For less than one percent of Portland’s transportation budget, we’ve increased bicycling from negligible to significant. For the cost of one mile of freeway—about $50 million—we’ve built 275 of bikeways.”24 Spending 1 percent of transportation funds on a network serving 8 percent of commuters sounds like a good deal, even better when you consider the indirect economic benefits. In contrast to widened roads and other highway “improvements,” new bikeways actually increase the value of nearby real estate. (Location 2566)
- It’s not for nothing that Portland even has a woman called “the Bike Realtor,” Kirsten Kaufman, who specializes in selling overpriced homes next to bike routes. Her website, bikerealtor.com, lays it out simply enough: “I get it. I specialize in helping people who want to drive less and enjoy life more. I know from personal experience that the less time my family spends in the car, the happier and healthier we are.” (Location 2571)
- And then there are the noneconomic benefits to a community that has reshaped itself around bicycles. In Pedaling Revolution—the seminal book on urban cycling—Jeff Mapes describes one popular local activity, “bike moving,” in which people literally help each other change homes through the exclusive use of pedal power. It sounds like a great way to meet people, although perhaps not as effective as North America’s largest annual naked bike ride, also claimed by Portland.26 (Don’t forget the baby wipes.) (Location 2577)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- Before turning to New York’s recent transformation, it is worth mentioning one other American city, Boulder, Colorado. In a mere three years, from 2000 to 2003, the percentage of residents’ commute trips by bike tripled, from an already hefty 7 percent to an epic 21 percent, thanks to investment in biking and transit.27 Ninety-five percent of Boulder’s arterial streets—the type usually most dangerous to cyclists—have been made bike friendly, with what can now be described as the expected results. Similar things are happening in Seattle, Chicago, Madison, Minneapolis, and elsewhere. (Location 2582)

> Im glad that a Colorado city is mentioned for biking

- It can now be said with some confidence that any urban road investment that ignores bicyclists is money that could be better spent. (Location 2587)
- John Pucher and Ralph Buehler summed up the predicament in their important paper, “Cycling for Few or for Everyone”: (Location 2666)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- In The Cyclist’s Manifesto, Robert Hurst comes out strongly in favor of sharrows over bike lanes, (Location 2720)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- THE COMFORTABLE WALK (Location 2792)

### STEP 7: SHAPE THE SPACES (Location 2795)

- architectural and urbanistic elements evocative of this space—colonnades, loggias, arcades, verandas, even porches—are so appealing and comfortable.” (Location 2807)
- Gehl obviously has not seen Monty Python’s hilarious abattoir-designer-as-architect sketch,■ but his point is hard to discredit. (Location 2862)
	- Tags: #add-video-to-watch
- Jan Gehl may be the world’s leading observer of how people use places. In Cities for People, (Location 2866)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- Yet Gehl’s well-earned distaste for large things extends to building heights as well. This stance puts him in the company of some of our most prominent urban thinkers while alienating him from others. In A Pattern Language, the bestselling design book of all time, Christopher Alexander drew the limit at four stories, noting that “there is abundant evidence to show that high buildings make people crazy.” (Location 2879)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- He also notes that tall buildings capture the air currents that circulate around the ten-story level, which “can cause wind speed at the foot of tall buildings to be up to four times greater than in the surrounding open landscape.” He observes that, in Amsterdam, umbrellas protect people, while in (high-rise) Rotterdam, people protect umbrellas. (Location 2889)
- There is no doubt that climate exerts some influence [[on walking]], but the evidence suggests that this factor is not half as impactful as street design. In that regard, I have always found these three questions to be especially useful: What North American city has the most linear feet of successful retail-fronted sidewalks? Toronto. What developed country has the highest share of urban trips going to walking instead of driving? Sweden.● How many months out of the year do sidewalk cafés stay open in [[Denmark|Copenhagen]]? Twelve. (Location 2928)

> Here is a win for Sweden and [[Denmark|Copenhagen]]

- The lesson we learn from these places is that walking down a narrow, shop-lined street in icy Boston or sweltering Savannah is a vastly superior experience to walking down an arterial between parking lots and car dealerships on San Diego’s best day. Get the design right and people will walk in almost any climate. (Location 2933)

### STEP 8: PLANT TREES (Location 2935)

- It’s best not to pick favorites in the walkability discussion—every individual point counts—but the humble American street tree might win my vote. (Location 2942)
- Often the first item in the budget to be cut, street trees are key to pedestrian comfort and urban livability in so many ways. In addition to offering shade, they reduce ambient temperatures in hot weather, absorb rainwater and tailpipe emissions, provide UV protection, and limit the effects of wind. Trees also slow cars and improve the sense of enclosure by “necking down” the street space with their canopies. A consistent cover of trees can go a long way toward making up for an otherwise nasty walk. (Location 2943)
- Because they have such a powerful impact on walkability, street trees have been associated with significant improvements in both property values and retail viability. Since this enhancement translates directly into increased local tax revenue, it could be considered financially irresponsible for a community to not invest heavily in trees. (Location 2946)
- As a result, soft pedestrians have proved a much lesser threat to moving vehicles than hard trees. In the face of this challenge, there are two complementary tactics for convincing transportation engineers to advocate for street trees. The first is to shame them into placing pedestrian safety on par with driver safety. But since this approach is not always effective, the larger strategy would be to convince them that street trees make roadways safer for drivers as well as pedestrians. This counterintuitive supposition has one important argument on its side, which is that it appears to be true. Thanks to risk homeostasis, drivers respond to the presence of broad “recovery zones” by speeding, and crashes become both more frequent and more deadly. (Location 2967)
- The relevant term here is “urban heat island,” a downside of city living that can largely be eliminated by proper tree cover. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the cooling impact of a single healthy tree “is equivalent to ten room-size air conditioners operating 24 hours a day.”7 Our reliance on air conditioners means that the ambient temperature of our treeless cities exerts a global warming double whammy, (Location 2986)
- Not only do shade-deprived neighborhoods make the world hotter, but they require much more electricity to cool, most of which is still sourced from coal. A properly shaded neighborhood is said to require 15 to 35 percent less air conditioning than a treeless one. (Location 2990)
- Climate change begets air conditioning begets carbon pollution begets climate change. Denser urban canopies could help short-circuit this vicious circle. (Location 2993)
- large role that trees perform simply as a carbon sink. In what economists call an “ecosystem service,” trees are unsurpassed in the landscape at gobbling up CO2. And urban trees, located as they are in close proximity to roadways, are ten times more effective than more distant vegetation at hijacking car exhaust before it hits the stratosphere. (Location 2994)
- What about water? One of the biggest and costliest problems facing many cities is the pollution caused by combined sewage overflows (CSOs). More than nine hundred American communities, many of them large cities like mine, have old collection systems that combine stormwater with sanitary sewage. (Location 3001)
- What does this have to do with street trees? Well, here’s what happens when an inch of rain falls on a tree: the first 30 percent of the precipitation is typically absorbed directly by the leaves and never even touches the ground.13 Once the leaves are saturated, up to 30 percent more of the rain seeps into the soil, made more porous by the tree’s root structure. This root structure then slurps the water back up into the tree, from which it is eventually transpired back into the air. This process allows a mature tree to absorb about half an inch of water from every rainfall.14 As a result, communities that add 25 percent additional tree cover will reduce their stormwater by 10 percent.15 In many American cities, this 10 percent would be enough to eliminate most CSOs. (Location 3011)
- “The first duty of the inhabitant of forlorn neighborhoods is to use all possible influence to have the streets planted with trees.”18 So intoned the dominant landscape architect of the antebellum period, Andrew Jackson Downing. In Republic of Shade, (Location 3030)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
- THE INTERESTING WALK (Location 3094)

### STEP 9: MAKE FRIENDLY AND UNIQUE FACES (Location 3098)

- Mayor Joe Riley of Charleston, South Carolina, now in his tenth term, tells the story of when he tried to convince a local architect to make a new parking garage look instead like a traditional Charleston building. “We learned in school that form follows function,” the architect said, “so this building needs to look like a garage.” “Yes, I learned that too,” replied the mayor. “We’re just not going to do that in Charleston.” (Location 3116)
	- Tags: #add-book-to-read
	- Read a book about Joe Riley. Being in the tenth term of a city that ive heard good things about is no small accomplishment
- That building now graces East Bay Street, where it does three important things right. First, it places high-ceilinged commercial space on the ground floor directly against the sidewalk, giving it windows, doors, and human activity. Second, it hides its tilted car ramps away from the edges of the building, so that it doesn’t shout “I am a garage.” Placing the flat parking areas at the building’s perimeter also allows for its eventual transformation to nonautomotive use.● Third, it details its upper floors as if they were inhabited, with window-sized openings equipped with Charleston-style shutters. The shutters are closed, which limits the building’s gregariousness but also hides the cars behind them. Upon closer inspection, this building clearly serves cars more than humans, but you have to look hard to see it. (Location 3119)
- It is fairly easy to gauge the intelligence of a city’s planning department by asking a simple question: in downtowns and other areas of potential pedestrian life, do your rules require that all parking lots be hidden behind a habitable building edge? (Location 3136)
- In Cities for People, Gehl talks about the “edge effect”: how “wherever people stay for a while, they seek out places along the edges of the space.”2 He photographs Siena’s famous Piazza del Campo, where the main pavement is surrounded by chunky man-size bollards, each one having accumulated the appendage of a standing or sitting man. These simple stone posts serve as anchors in a sea of activity, inviting people to tether themselves and stay a while. Most often, this job is performed by the fronts of buildings which, if adequately porous and deep, attract both walkers and lingerers. By porous, I refer to windows and doors, proper interior lighting, and any other measure that better connects the interior of the store to the sidewalk. By deep, I mean the degree to which the facade provides opportunities for shelter, leaning, sitting, and other physical engagement, and also how effective the design is at blurring the distinction between public and private while drawing out the experience of entering and exiting. (Location 3144)
- A bit ahead of the curve, both Melbourne and [[Sweden]] have adopted active facade policies. Melbourne’s code, for example, requires that “60 percent of street facades in new buildings along major streets must be open and inviting.” (Location 3170)
- The most prominent version of this ordinance, called the SmartCode, is a piece of open-source shareware available for free download.● This document is a comprehensive tool for making better places, and almost every growing city would benefit from throwing out its current zoning in favor of the SmartCode or something similar. However, replacing an entire code is a big job. (Location 3180)
- In 1993, I was working with Andres Duany on the resuscitation of 5th Avenue South, the main street of Naples, Florida. One of the things we noticed was that most of the shops had awnings no bigger than umbrellas, little semicircular zits that didn’t begin to shade the street’s parched sidewalks. We looked into the building code, and found that, unbelievably, any awning larger than a certain tiny size had to be sprinkled for fire suppression. We got rid of that rule first. (Location 3184)

> This is both hilarious and a good practical example of incremental improvement

- Most architecture schools still promote an intellectual and artistic sensibility that has little patience for such mundane questions as whether a building will sustain pedestrian activity. (Location 3196)
- Fred Kent. Kent, who runs the Project for [[Public Spaces]], pointedly asked Gehry why so many “iconic” buildings by star architects fail to give life to the streets and sidewalks around them. (Location 3198)
	- [x] Create note about [[Public Spaces]] ✅ 2024-10-18
- Kent was no doubt recalling his son Ethan’s visit to Gehry’s masterpiece, the Guggenheim Bilbao, an experience he describes in the Project for [[Public Spaces]] website’s “Hall of Shame.” After failing to find the front door and taking note of the treeless, depopulated plaza, Ethan observed a mugging, something he later learned was common there. He adds, “In the span of 10 minutes that we spent around the museum, I witnessed the first mugging of my life—and I’ve lived my entire life in New York City.” (Location 3207)
- That one of these places enfronts the Guggenheim is partly Gehry’s fault, the outcome of a landscape (more of a landscrape) conceived as a tabula rasa to show off the building to its best effect.● Gehry is actually perfectly capable of contributing to attractive, engaging landscapes—as he has done in Chicago’s Millennium Park—but he rarely does so with his buildings, most of which do not reward proximity. His Disney Hall, in Los Angeles, has about fifteen hundred feet of perimeter, perhaps one thousand feet of which is blank wall of the most slippery sort. (Location 3212)
- But it’s a concert hall, you say … it needs to have blank walls. Well, take a stroll around the Paris Opera, or even Boston’s Symphony Hall, and let’s talk again. These older buildings’ facades are awash in engaging detail, so that even their blank walls don’t feel blank. Walking next to them is a pleasure. (Location 3217)
- Any architectural style—except minimalism, I suppose—is capable of providing those mediumand small-scale details that engage people as they approach and walk by. The high-tech Pompidou Center, by celebrating its mechanical systems on its exterior, gives life to one of the most successful [[Public Spaces]] in Paris. What matters is not whether the details were crafted by a stone carver or a cold extruder, but whether they exist at all. Too many contemporary architects fail to understand this point, or understand it but don’t care. (Location 3226)
- On large projects, the path to avoiding this sort of outcome is straightforward and involves naming a master developer who oversees the project but who is not the developer of the individual buildings. That role can be played by the city, by a public authority, or even by a private developer in certain cases. What matters is that different buildings are built by different people. The result, in true Small Is Beautiful practice, is the city of chipmunks, not of gorillas. Happily, while gorillas usually come in from out of town, chipmunks are mostly homegrown and have a greater vested interest in the outcome. (Location 3274)
	- [x] Figure out where the Small is Beautiful reference is from ✅ 2024-11-08
	- "Small is Beautiful" is a reference to the book by E.F. Schumacher. The book focuses on economics and sustainability. It promotes the idea that economies should prioritize quality of life over economic growth. Schumacher argues that small-scale technologies and practices are more sustainable and beneficial for society. Published in 1973, the book has influenced sustainable and local economy movements.
	- #add-book-to-read Small is Beautiful by E.F. Schumacher
- This critical outlook toward open space puts Owen in the company of Jane Jacobs, who had this to say fifty years prior: The first necessity in understanding how cities and their parks influence each other is to jettison confusion between real uses and mythical uses—for example, the science-fiction nonsense that parks are “the lungs of the city.” It takes about three acres of woods to absorb as much carbon dioxide as four people exude in breathing, cooking, and heating. The oceans of air circulating about us, not our parks, keep cities from suffocating. (Location 3290)
- This doesn’t mean that we should stop building parks—Chicago and Seattle are two cities with new, big, expensive waterfront parks that nobody regrets—but rather that we shouldn’t allow open space to rip apart the urban fabric of our walkable city centers. Every city, particularly if it is to attract millennials, needs to provide easy access to nature, including regionally scaled trails for hiking and biking. (Location 3298)
- Likewise, frequent small pocket parks and playgrounds are key for retaining citizens into their parenting years. (Location 3301)

### STEP 10: PICK YOUR WINNERS (Location 3310)

- This error points the way to the first question to ask before investing in walkability: where can spending the least money make the most difference? The answer, as obvious as it is ignored, is on streets that are already framed by buildings that have the potential to attract and sustain street life. In other words, places where an accommodating private realm already exists to give comfort and interest to an improved public realm. Most cities have their fair share of streets like this, where historic shopfronts and other attractive buildings line sidewalks that are blighted only by a high-speed, treeless roadway. Fix the street, and you’ve got the whole package, or close to it. (Location 3324)
- Here, the categories of patient are slightly different: first to receive care are the “A” streets that are best poised to benefit from it. Second are the “B” streets that might present a bit of a tougher win, but are needed to tie the best streets together into a proper network—more on that in a minute. Third, and off the table, is what remains: the automotive city. These “C” streets should not be allowed to go to seed; by all means, fill the potholes and pick up the trash. But don’t worry about sidewalk widths, street trees, or bike lanes—at least, not in this decade. (Location 3333)
- The second category above, streets that connect, requires the greatest amount of thought, along with—dare I say it—some design. Because, in any city’s downtown, there is a network of walkability, sometimes hidden, that is waiting to emerge. Coaxing it to the surface requires some careful observation and then a decisive design effort. At its heart is the concept of anchors and paths. (Location 3338)
- In a downtown, the anchors are few and fairly easy to identify: major retailers, large parking structures, movie theaters, and any other use that generates significant foot traffic on a regular basis, such as a performance hall or a baseball stadium.● An already-walkable street network is also a type of anchor, as it creates pedestrians who are willing to stroll farther afield if that walk is rewarded. Sometimes these anchors are quite close to each other, but almost nobody walks between them because of the poor quality of the connection. Beyond the conditions of the roadway itself, this street may suffer from a lack of well-defined, active edges that puts it firmly in “B” or even “C” territory. If this stretch is short enough and opportunities exist for its development, it might make sense for the city to spend money to fix it quickly. (Location 3346)
- This was precisely the scenario in Columbus, Ohio, where the city’s convention center and arena were cut off from the gritty Short North neighborhood by a below-grade interstate highway, reamed through in the sixties. Getting from one side to the other meant crossing a barren, windswept bridge, complete with chain-link suicide screen. When it became necessary in 2003 to reconstruct this bridge, the city and state did an unusually smart thing: instead of building a one-hundred-foot-wide bridge, they built a two-hundred-foot-wide bridge, creating two retail pads on its flanks. They gave these pads to an enlightened developer, who built a modern-day Ponte Vecchio, lining the sidewalks with shops and restaurants. For an additional public cost of $1.9 million, this novel bridge performed an act of magic: it made a highway disappear. Now conventioneers regularly visit the Short North, and the difference to businesses there is described as “night and day.” Two walkable districts have been unified into one, and an entire sector of the city has changed its character. (Location 3356)
	- [x] Share this with [[Kolt Kane|Kolt]] and go check it out next time i am there ✅ 2024-11-08
- For this reason, when I do a walkability plan, it is a multistep process. First, I study every street that has a chance of being walkable and I grade it in terms of its urban qualities. I ignore the street’s traffic characteristics, since they are simple to fix, and look only at comfort and interest: spatial definition and the presence of friendly faces. This effort produces a map in which the streets are colored from green through yellow to red based on their potential to attract pedestrian life. From this map, a pattern emerges, in which certain streets that are good enough come together to form a clear network of walkability. I then supplement this network with the additional streets that are necessary to connect it to the key anchors that it almost reaches, including other pieces of itself. The result is an urban triage plan: streets are either in or out. This plan mandates the pattern for both public and private investment over the next decade. Only the “in” streets are to receive walkability improvements like safer traffic patterns, street trees, and better sidewalks. Only the “in” street properties are to receive city redevelopment support, whether that means money or just expedited permitting. And the “missing teeth” within this network—especially along the key severed connections—get the full front-burner treatment. Ideally, the entirety of the city leadership, both public sector and private sector, comes together around a simple understanding: Build These Sites First. (Location 3368)
- The lesson of LoDo is to start small with something that is as good as you can make it. That is the beauty of urban triage. (Location 3397)
	- This is a good motto for most projects
- By trying to be universally excellent, most cities end up universally mediocre. Walkability is likely only in those places where all the best of what a city has to offer is focused in one area. Concentration, not dispersion, is the elixir of urbanity. (Location 3406)
- embodies two of his dominant personality traits: a violent allergy to wasting time, and an intellectual generosity of truly historic proportion. (Location 3432)
	- I would the words would be said of me
